---
title: "Exciting news: our bot can count votes!"
rss-title: "[📣  ]Exciting news: our bot can count votes!"
github: "https://github.com/commonhaus/foundation-draft/discussions/100"
author: "ebullient"
number: 100
date: 2024-03-09T14:20:58Z
updated: 2024-03-09T14:21:41Z
url: "/activity/100.html"
type: discussion
tags:
- post
- announcements
- notice
---
### Announcement

We've introduced a bot to automate parts of our voting process.

Here's how it simplifies our decision-making:

- **Targeted Voting:** It counts votes specifically from different groups within our organization like the cf-council, egc, founders, or general members.

- **Flexible Voting Criteria:** It supports various voting methods, including Martha's rules (approve, okay, revise), unique comments, or any type of reaction.

How this works (item == PR or discussion):

1. When an item is tagged with `vote/open`, the posts a summary comment and adds a link to this summary at the top of the discussion/PR description. This link also includes a visual indicator of the voting status.
2. The bot will periodically check the reactions (or count comments) on open items with the `vote/open` label, and will update its comment with the current status (how many votes in total, how many from the target/required group).
4. When the comment is updated, a GH Action sends a notification to the website repository, which will regenerate the related results page and status indicator. 

The bot already sends emails to the announce list when labels (`notice`, `vote/open`) are added to items.

We're still fine-tuning the process for concluding a vote, but the counting mechanism is excellent.

See it in action here: 

- https://github.com/commonhaus/foundation-draft/discussions/95 -- The `vote/quorum` label was added by bot, as everyone in the `founders` group responded (thank you!). A status indicator link was also added to the top of the description.
- You can also have a look at the [**unstyled** results page](https://www.commonhaus.org/votes/commonhaus/foundation-draft/95.html).

Updates to the website look and feel are coming soon. ;)
